# DCEC Semantic Analyzer

## Description
This system programmatically generates, in the spirit of computational semantics, formal expressions in the language of the Deontic Cognitive Event Calculus (DCEC) from natural language sentences expressed in English.  A description of the DCEC can be found here:  http://kryten.mm.rpi.edu/PRICAI_w_sequentcalc_041709.pdf.  Whereas many computational semantic systems translate from natural language to First-Order Logic (FOL), this system targets the DCEC because of its greater expressivity with respect to the deontic, epistemic, doxastic, and tempooral dimensions.  As discussed in the paper whose link is given above, the DCEC offers the ability to model agents that must negotiate the behavior of other agents, by modeling their beliefs, knowledge, and intentions.  Providing a platform for programmatic translation of natural language sentences into this expressive representational language (i.e., the DCEC) promotes the prospect of automated reasoning from natural language descriptions of the problem domain.  Among other applications, this approach has applications in finer-grained question answer (QA), dialog representation theory, multi-agent systems, and more.

Acknowledgements are owed to Patrick Blackburn and Johan Ros whose textbook, Representation and Inference in Natural Language, (2006), CSLI Publications ISBN:  1575864967, inpired the lambda-calulus-based approach adopted in this system and provided supporting utility predicates including those for alpha and beta conversion of lambda calculus expressions generated from the grammar specified in this system.

## Instructions

1.  Navigate to the directory where this system was downloaded.
2.  If you do not already have swi-prolog installed, download prolog from here: http://www.swi-prolog.org/ and install on your workstation.
2.  Start swi-prolog by typing: "swipl<Enter>" at the bash prompt. 
3.  Execute [lambda_dcec]. to load this kb.
4.  Follow the instructions as listed in the menu.
5.  Some example sentences are given below.  However, please use all lower case when inputting the names (unlike what is shown, below).

## Sample sentences

The DCEC semantic analyzer is still in its early stages of development.  However, below we show some sample sentences, and their DCEC representations as generated by the DCEC semantic analyzer system.  These should provide some insight into the goals of the system, and its expressiveness.  Reasoning from these representations is discussed in detail in the paper whose link is provided above.

1.  Alice sees that in the beginning, Bob places the cookie in the cabinet.

DCEC representation:  S(alice,happens(action(bob, place(cookie,cabinet)),beginning))


2.  Julia knows that Mia paid the rent yesterday.

DCEC representation:  K(julia,happens(action(mia,pay(rent),yesterday))


3.  Vincent knows that Billy knows that Vincent will sell the car tomorrow.

DCEC representation:  K(vincent,K(billy,happens(action(vincent,sell(car)),tomorrow)))


4.  Vincent believes that Billy will sell a car tomorrow.  (note the use of the indefinite article, a, in this sentence vs. the definite article, the, in sentence 3, and the handling of those different situations by the DCEC semantic analyzer.)

DCEC representation:  B(vincent,some(X,and(car(X),happens(action(billy,sell(X)),tomorrow))))

